# Shared

# Task Definition Schema

The schema is defined in JSON and [Quicktype](https://quicktype.io) is used to generate validation code.

The task.config.cache object allows for flexible cache rules, it is an array of cache objects (so use APPEND_cache to allow for inheritance):
* cache.subTask - this allows to control the caching in subTasks, it is a string e.g. "SubTaskLLM"
* cache.enable - boolean, can be excluded and in that case is assumed to be true
* cache.seed - array of strings or paths in the task object e.g. ["task.name"]

task.commands:
* start
* update
* partial
* nop

The Task object currently has a fixed set of top level properties. Several properties are objects:
* privacy - a copy of the Task object's structure with boolean types that indicate if the property should be sent from the NodeJS Task Processor to the React Task Processor. For example, this could avoid sending prompts in config data to the web browser.
* input - any object, provided to the task when it starts
* output - any object, generated by the task that is available to other tasks
* config - any object, for configuration
* state - an object that allows the Task Processor to manage the Task state
* request - any object, defines what the recipient of the Task should do
* response - any object, results from a request

Separate the concerns addressed by the Task Definition:
* Versioning
* Authentication
* Authorization
* Task Hub interaction
* Task Routing
* Task Processor interaction
* Task Identity
* Task Metadata
* Task Masking
* Task Relations
* Error handling
* Task Configuration
* IO
* Task State

There is a hierarchy: 
* Versioning
  * Authentication
    * Authorization
      * Task Hub
        * Task Routing
          * Task Processor
            * Task Identity
                * Task Masking
                  * Task Metadata
                    * Task Relations
                  * Error handling
                    * Task Configuration
                    * Task Function
                      * Status
                      * State
                        * Incoming
                          * Request
                          * Response
                        * Outgoing
                          * Request
                          * Response
                        * IO


If a request is made then, typically, the entire Task object is sent. A copy of the Task may be held and it would then be the responsibility of the Task to deal with the Task object being updated when the request is completed. The state can be used to communicate between the Task Processor functionality of a Task.

It would be relatively simple to maintain a copy of the last Task received on the NodeJS Task Processor and a copy of the last Task received on the React Task Processor, then to send only the difference when updating the Task. Anoher option is to use GraphQL.

The infrastructure provided by the Task Processor should perform the updates to the Task object as this allows for services to be provided upon value changes.

# Task merging

The rules for merging the Task are: there should be no changes to the same entries in the Task object, changes made locally are kept and changes from the updated task are merged (in that order). There should be a check for any conflicts where a value has been set locally and is also set by the updated Task.

## Future
JSON schema provides several keywords to specify rules for relationships, such as allOf, anyOf, oneOf, and not.

Draft-07 introduces conditional schema evaluation using the if, then, and else keywords. They provide a way to apply subschemas conditionally, allowing for more complex validation logic. Draft-07 introduces the propertyNames keyword, which can be used to apply a schema to the names of all properties in an object, allowing for validation of property names.

What additional concerns are address: incoming/outgoing, logging

v03:
* privacy -> propertyMask
* config.label -> label
* change timestamp (completedAt, createdAt, updatedAt) types to Date
* groupId as an array
* Add signature so service could sign a Task
* familyId becomes array
* priority as an integer (0 - 100)
* status as an enum type (pending, in progress, completed, failed)
* error -> errorMessage as string + errorDetails as object
* expireAt as a Date
* resourceRequirement as an object with properties: cpu, memory, disk, network, environment (e.g., browser, python, nodejs etc) 
* dependencies as an array of instanceIds
* resourceConsumed as an object with properties: cpu, memory, disk, network Could also include a signature. Allows for metrics.
* tags as an array of strings
* history an array of transactions made on the Task? Might be a debug aid.
* lang as a language code
* incomingRequest
* response -> incomingResponse
* incomingCount
* request -> outgoingRequest
* outgoingResponse
* outgoingCount
* processor data provided by the Task processor
  * location
  * API a list of API ids consider what langchain does for models
* logHistory as an array of log messages
* log as a string
* permissions -> groupAccess
* error -> an object with type and message and stack (or just a free-form object)
* Task processor timezone

### Task Processor

Below needs to be updated now that there is a Hub

The Task processor should:
* validate the Task
* In the future:
  * move outgoingResponse to incomingResponse upon receiving a Task
  * move outgoingRequest to incomingRequest upon receiving a Task
* send the Task when send is true
* Monitor the Task for resource overusage
* Provide a function to set Task properties (manage updatedAt)
* Provide a function to get Task properties
* Manage properties:
  * completedAt, createdAt, updatedAt
  * id, instanceId
  * threadId, children
  * parentId, parentInstanceId
  * userId
  * stack, stackPtr
  * updateCount
* Manage future properties:
  * signature, status, dependencies, incomingCount, outgoingCount, history
* Provide a sevice to "start" a new Task
* Manage authentication and authorization
* Manage property privacy
* Rate limit
* Create nextTask involves 
  * Copying: threadId, lang, userId
  * Creating threadId, instanceId
  * Updating: createdAt, parentId, parentInstanceId
* Archiving completed Tasks
  * updating completedAt
* Logging, error handling, debug support (view into Task)
* Timeouts
* Resource allocation
* Metrics
* Access to archived tasks e.g. by threadId

Task Processor functionality
* stopTask
* writeTask
* readTask
* deleteTask
* getTask
* nextTask
* getTaskThread
* forkTask
* archiveTask
* getTaskHistory
* getTaskMetrics
* validateTask
* getTaskSchema


Rather than going through function calls we use the Task object. This allows a task written in one langauge to run on a Task Processor written in anoher language.
* command -> stopTask, writeTask, readTask, deleteTask, getTask, nextTask, getTaskThread, forkTask, archiveTask, getTaskHistory, getTaskMetrics, validateTask, getTaskSchema
* commandAgs -> arguments for command
* commandResult -> result of command
* commandStatus -> status of command: inProgress, completed, failed
* commandLog -> log of commands
The commands could use JSON-RPC format

The Task may use a library to have a function based interface to the Task Processor.

### Task Environment

The task environment is the software stack that the Task requires. For example the React Task Processor requires a web browser with Javascript. This will allow for Task Processors to accept Tasks if they can provide the correct environment. This will make the system more scalable.

## Open Issues
The request/response fields are used to send Task specific information between the NodeJS Task Processor and React Task Processor but the principle could be applied for other services. We need to think about how this should be separated from the Task specific schema e.g., a distinction between internal and external requests. In this way a Task could publish a service and other tasks could make requests (rather than assuming the communication is within a Task). Could have:
* internalRequest
* internalResponse
* externalRequest
* externalResponse
These could be arrays to support multiple requests/responses. Another organization could be:
* incomingRequest
* incomingResponse
* incomingCount
* outgoingRequest
* outgoingResponse
* outgoingCount
Then the infrastructure could look after queuing etc. This might be simpler. A Task that wants to look after multiple request/response could still do this by asynchronously accepting all incoming messages. This seems better.

Incoming request/response should be in task.processor and outgoing request/response should be in task.

The v02 list of top level properties: baseType, children, completedAt, createdAt, error, permissions, groupId, id, initiator, name, nextTasks, nextTask, parentId, parentInstanceId, parentType, send, stack, stackPtr, threadId, type, updateCount, updatedAt, userId, versionExternal, versionInternal, privacy, input, output, config, state, request, response

We can categorize this from different perspectives:
* static vs dynamic
* internal vs external
* timestamps, identifiers, versioning, task structure, task status and error handling, task data and configuration, privacy settings

Privacy is misleading as it is just concerned about masking the properties during communication. Should rename to propertyMask.

Timestamps are indicated with "At" suffix.

There is a generic authorization concern. At the moment we have a userID and a groupId (this could allow for multiple user interaction, organizations). We should probably use a standard for authentication and authorization. Basically userId is authentication and groupId is authorization.

Should T@sk2Flow be managing authentication e.g. signing of the Task or is that the responsibility of the infrastructure? In a distributed system this is a central concern (services should not be able to impersonate ).

Dealing with forking and merging

A job processing system would be a good comparison point

Status: There is no explicit status property indicating the current state of the task (e.g., pending, in progress, completed, failed). While some properties like 'completedAt' and 'error' can provide status-related information, having a dedicated status property can be more useful.

Expiration: A time-to-live (TTL) or expiration property can be useful in job processing systems to ensure tasks are not executed after a certain period or to clean up tasks that have been sitting in the queue for too long.

Could imagine the Task has a resource requirement and services could then compete to run the Task.

Dependencies: The schema does not explicitly handle task dependencies. While properties like 'nextTasks', 'nextTask', and 'parentId' can be used to describe some task relationships, having a dedicated property for dependencies can be beneficial in managing task execution order and handling complex taskflows.

Metrics and monitoring: Properties related to task metrics and monitoring (e.g., duration, start time, end time, and performance indicators) are missing from the schema. These properties can be useful in understanding the efficiency and effectiveness of the job processing system.
## Generating

It is possible to have node generate the validation code from the schema. This is done by the generate-converter-v02.mjs script.

To install the node packages: `npm install` 

Then to run: `npm run generate-converter-v02` 

## Upgrading
The convertConfigV01toV02.mjs is a script that helped with the conversion of V01 to V02

Changing the schema was a painful exercise:
* Javascript uses references in hierarchical data structures and this can create issues e.g. code that worked with a shallow data structure breaks with a deeper data structure.
* Common names make it hard to do global search & replace. A more semantic search and replace would help a lot.
* Formatting the code with Prettier should make for easier search & replace

## History
Moving from v0.1 to v0.2 was a major hassle because v0.1 was a "flat" object and v0.2 has a hierarchical structure e.g. name
Javascript does not have a compact way for accessing keys e.g. {name: "toto"} is not possible
Updating objects in React also becomes more complicated as the ...task is shallow and we need to manage the deep merge/update of objects.

The basic approach to updating the Task Processor code is to use the taskV01toV02Map.mjs functions so parts of the system can be converted to v0.2 progressively rather than having everything break at once. For example if a function is dealing with a task then at the beginning `task = fromV01toV02(task)` then update the code for v0.2 and at the end of hte code block `task = fromV02toV01(task)`. Then once all the React Task Processor or NodeJS Task Processor code is moved we can place the conversion at the API, eventually only the communication is in v0.1 then it can be dropped. 

I modified the task object to suport a v02 field that held the new v0.2 object. It has the advantage of being able to view the content and spot problems with taskV01toV02Map.mjs 

Moving from v0.1 to v0.2 also makes a split between generic Task data and specific task data. Eventually each specific Task would have a schema.

